foreign
testing
hello everyone
Paul can hear me
I can hear you yeah can you hear
jittery
is it okay let's see what about my
volume is it good enough
yeah you're all good
thank you
actually
get out of the camera hi hi hi everyone
we are getting started how is everyone
doing today
all right give us a minute here as we
get set up for our sorbonne developer
Workshop we are writing our first smart
contract on sorbonne and we have Morgan
and Paul joining us on stream here today
to do this Workshop hey Morgan hey Paul
how are you all doing
hey everyone doing good
yeah going good here how are you new
here I'm doing well I am in the SDF
office
it's been so exciting the devrel team
has been expanding and we're onboarding
so many new developers and it's it's
been exciting sorbond's really changing
and we're innovating and I can't wait to
see what more is going to come out of
this
but all right oh you were at Paris
blockchain week right Morgan so what is
this that's true
I yes
here I feel like this is this is what
the SDF office looks like everyone
anyone
yes I think we should do like a live
stream tour of sdf's California SF
headquarters I think that would make a
fun stream
everybody's work and see what they're
doing just like pop around and
interact with people
I'd love to hear that what's with them
with the Media Kit in the background
yeah we'll find out with yeah I know
but so many comments here cool cool
single monitors only yeah y'all we have
only single monitors around in office
I will let them know we need curved
monitors we need all that cool Tech
but yeah all right without further Ado
Paul Morgan I will let you all kick off
about this workshop and talk about
what you presented at Paris blockchain
week and I'll let you start off Paul
cool yeah
I think I'm presenting here how do I
make that happen on the screen
there we go yeah cool that looked like
it a second ago
yeah that's the one cool
yeah welcome everybody good
morning good evening good night
wherever you happen to be welcome to
live stream I'm writing your first smart
contract on sorbom
here's what we're gonna be going
through today
so first off we'll do a bit of an
intro we'll talk a bit about what is
sore bond for those that don't know
we'll have a cool hello world demo
from Morgan and we'll talk a little
bit about why store Bond's important why
it matters why it's good why you should
build everything on it
and then we'll have a bit more for
Morgan on his kind of journey and how
he got to sorbonne and how I got
involved with all this and then
Tyler will share a bit on how you can
get involved
and then I will wrap up from there and
we'll do some questions and stuff at the
end
so first off who are we right my
name is Paul I will start there I'm a
Staff engineer at the Stellar
development foundation which means I get
to work on Soroban every day building
and making it happen for all of you
so I'm really excited to be here
today to share some of the stuff that
I've been working on what is the
Stellar development foundation if you
don't know and you've somehow stumbled
into this stream anyway the SDF works
with the Stellar Community which is all
of you to build the Stellar Network
the Stellar network is a fast and
reliable L1 blockchain with finality in
just five seconds the Network's been
live since about 2015. it and has
seen sustained real world usage of 150
transactions a second with literally no
problem just cruising along which is
pretty crazy to think about
it has a Global Network of anchors
it's what we call which are on and off
on and off ramps issuing on-chain
versions of assets from the real world
including cash access which we'll talk
about later and for the last year we've
been building something new sarban so
what is Soroban
so sorbonne is a new add-on to the
Stellar Network traditionally the
vanilla stoneware Network didn't have
Smart contracts there were there was a
few L2 attempts right like turrets that
some of you might know but they had some
issues around that like atomicity
yeah and other things like that
so we wanted to open up more
decentralized Innovation to the network
and to open up new opportunities to the
underserved and unbanked populations
that Stellar's built to serve
and I mean my big thing is payments is
such a small part of the financial world
it's like an important thing to get
right but it's just kind of the base
layer of what we can build here
so we announced the project that would
come to be known as Soroban back in
January of last year since then we've
shared eight I think iterative
releases yeah I want to preview eight
now onto our experimental test net
known as futurenet so devs can
experiment learn and contribute to the
design discussions
we've been regularly running a program
called sore bonathon we'll hear a bit
more about that later from Tyler
and we regularly discuss design choices
and onboard new devs to the community on
our Discord
the community interactions with all of
you lovely folks who are now in the
Stellar Community sorry I don't make the
rules but I will enforce them so you are
going to be part of the community now
the community interactions and the
public input has been really exciting to
see that's been my favorite part of this
journey it's been absolutely
mind-boggling
it's impacted almost everything about
sorbonne right from naming to
authentication how does that work to how
Soroban should integrate with the
existing vanilla Stellar Network
and while sarban isn't tightly covered
coupled to Stellar specifically it is
designed to work well with the network
so a bunch of stuff on that point
it's written end to end in Rust for
Speed efficiency and access to the
ecosystem that exists there
it comes with a bunch of plug and play
sdks for simple to complicated
authorization models and it's built to
scale right because it has to keep up
with the rest of the existing Network it
can't slow down the network
but the thing I'm probably most
excited about in store Bond and looking
forward to seeing is how it's empowering
all of you in the community now that you
can build on Stellar completely
Unchained hey I'm sorry I'm sorry
if I didn't make that joke Tyler said
he'd fire me so it had to happen
right at this point I'd like to
introduce Morgan he's a founder of
useorbonda app he's a Community member
who's been building some incredible
stuff to help onboard other devs to
Soroban and he's going to show us a bit
about what he's been working on
hello everyone I'm gonna start buying
sharing my screen
should have done this earlier
all right so here's here's a thing
that every developer
starts their programming Journeys with
we all like to say hello and we all like
to say hello to the world as the very
first thing that we do
in our programs
and
you know
almost everyone starts their Journey
that way
and in fact the time it takes for
someone to say hello world in a specific
programming environment
maybe the determining Factor if they're
going to continue their Journey
in that platform or not so I
definitely want you guys to stick around
for the rest of the presentation the
rest of the talk
so I'll just get started with the
hello world part
all right so what do we have here
as Paul mentioned
I am the founder of usurubond.app which
is this tool that you see right here
it is
a developer playground for saurabhan
smart contracts now what do we see on
screen exactly well I'm logged in
so
I have access to the Gated Alpha here
and I have the ability to create a new
project so let's go ahead and do that
new project pops up and let's go ahead
and delete everything because we're
going to start from scratch
what's this environment all about well
first we have a code Editor to the left
here
this is where we'll just put our rust
slash sorobong this playground runs
on Rust and the rest soar about SDK
you'll as you continue your journey
you'll find out that there's other
sdks for sword Bond available
for now we're going to deal with rust
because that's the sort of reference
implementation all right so we have the
code editor we'll we'll put our rest in
and sort by
and then we have some widgets so
right now console is open code is open
and let's get started with the hello
world part
so how do we do that in rest well I
guess we write a hello function
and we call the print line macro and say
hello
okay
compile it and that worked this is a
rest program as it should be compiled
and I abstract all the details for
creating cargo projects and
the defining targets and so forth so
you just sort of write some code and
click compile in you know you're Off to
the Races Morgan I'm going to interrupt
you for just one second can you zoom in
a little bit more because we can't see
it a little bit more
how about now
a lot more
a lot more yeah a little bit more I
would say yeah
it will be unusable if I zoom in any
further so I do apart for anyone
or we can we can hide my face there's a
lot of stuff on screen that's
not the code so we can just sort of
focus on the code here we go
there we go
sweeter like I'm almost blind and there
you go okay sweet we got one
confirmation I can see it fine carry on
and everyone can hide the faces because
like the vertical space might be useful
nothing but the screen share
all right perfect thank you
all right carrying on so print line
hello didn't work well at least it
compiled and didn't produce what we
wanted
why is the question and
well we're working in a soybean
environment right Soroban expects a
certain kind of format for these
things to work and everything that
we want to be able to call has to
live in a contract so
contracts are struck in rest we're
going to declare a contract struct
this name can be anything you want
call contract because it couldn't come
up with a better name
all right so we go ahead and Define an
implementation for contract
let's go ahead and copy this
from here
okay
all right compile this again and that
worked again no compiler errors but the
problem is we still don't see any hellos
popping up
so that's not great
ideally
you want to work with the SDK here
because you know a structure like this
is not really sort of buying
we got to tell it to do a little bit
more so for that we're going to use the
Soroban SDK
and we're going to import the contract
implementation macro and that's going to
do
a bunch of things but essentially this
will convert this implementation right
here into a Soroban contract
and okay we have a a few errors over
here
by the way Russ is super famous for
really good compiler errors and in this
environment which is enabled by Soroban
the way it's designed to leverage
webassembly and
and rust so we'll get those beautiful
Russ compiler errors and we can see that
there's some problems with the Panic
implementation although it's not
entirely clear what's going on so
I'll just sort of skip the mystery
here and
solve this problem by
finding this macro right here
so contracts on the blockchain have to
be super super efficient in how to use
the available Ledger space and rest
programs even though they're pretty
light they still carry a bunch of stuff
that we don't really need
as part of our contracts so to
eliminate everything that we don't need
and just get the rest that you know
the basic rest of that is required for
contract logic will we declare
the no STD macro
this
unfortunately
removes the ability for us to use the
print line macro to print this stuff and
okay so let's get rid of that now
we've back to a solid compiling
contract here and let's go ahead and
declare this function as a public
function
now we have something on on on screen up
here that's looking like a button
so in this actions widget which is sort
of the
a third of this interface in the middle
is where you will be able to click and
interact with every function that your
contract declares so our contract right
here declares a single hello function
we can call it and we'll see in the
console a return value
so it's implied that a function without
an explicit return value returns none in
rest so same applies here
and we're going to return value now
I guess we can leverage this return
Dynamic to finally say hello to everyone
tuning in
and for that we will need a special type
so again since we can't use the rest
strain it's unavailable we have to
figure a different way to carry our
information and for that we're going to
use a symbol which is an efficient data
type
in in sorobind for storing alphanumeric
characters essentially all the letters
of the alphabet plus the digits and the
underscore
so what we're going to do with symbol is
we're going to initialize a short symbol
that says hello
and short just means that this sequence
of characters will be able to fit in a
single 64-bit value which is pretty
important
when it comes to this this context
let's recompile this again
and oh thank you rust compiler we are
returning a value so let's make sure
that we declare what we're returning
and let's call this all right so we have
a return value hello
from this function right here and
this is sort of your basic most basic
implementation of a sorobind contract
that says hello to anyone tuning in
now let's make it a little bit more
spicy
and let's use a little bit more of the
environment here so let's say
we're going to log a value everybody
loves blogging as a you know someone
coming in from a web developer
background I use console log all the
time and console log is the best so
we have an equivalent in sorobind it's
called log the log macro and we're going
to declare a new function called hello2
and what are we going to do here we're
going to
gonna say hello to a specific name it's
going to be a symbol
and we're not going to return anything
okay so how do we interact with this log
macro
well it's a macro so we use a bang
and then the first argument is the
environment within which we're logging
this value and you'll get used to
this concept of every single function
that your contract has that interacts
with anything else anything in the
outside world will have to have an
environment as the very first argument
it's kind of like your access to
everything
so log accepts the first argument
being the environment so we're just
going to pass in in reference to the
environment next up we have a string
and we're going to use hello bang and
then we're going to provide the name
let's compile this
oh we're missing environment in in
this import and a handy feature is if
you're having problems with a specific
type or you're missing something you can
go ahead and click
links right inside of your compiler
widget that will take you to the
documentation so it's an easy feedback
loop so now that we've imported an
environment we can recompile this again
and try saying hello to
twitch I guess is where most of you are
and in this console widget we can see
that
in between hello too which is the
function that we're calling and the
return value we have a log that says
hello twitch
all right so I'm almost done with the
first demo anyone and everyone that's
tuning in you can actually test this on
your phone
so this is going to be a multi-modal
demo and for that I'm gonna
take my phone here so I just popped up
this share modal I'm going to take my
phone this is an actual phone I have
here bring up the camera
hey everyone
and I'll go ahead and look at the QR
code here tap on usurabond.app
and we can see we're taken to a version
of usurubundan app which is mobile
optimized and you know we gotta work on
mobile experiences just as much as a
desktop experience and someone that's
designing these apps we've got to be
mindful that that's where our audience
is so this kind of interface will allow
users to test this contract anywhere
they are especially on the mobile phone
so we have access to the same sort of
widgets we have the console open and
actions is a sheet down at the bottom we
can go ahead and call hello like we did
before quick access down at the bottom
to the previously called functions and
we can call hello to
and let's do twitch confirm and then we
can call this function with the same
arguments if we want to or we can change
the arguments
and do YouTube
okay all right so that does conclude
the demo everyone that scan the QR code
and we're able to interact with the
with the app here congratulations if
right now this is still in a gated Alpha
if you want access to the current build
please tweet me on at sorobine Dev on
Twitter and I'll make that happen
all right so I'm handing it off Back
To You Paul
Paul you there
we go okay I'm back thanks
Morgan can we get the slides up again
cool thank you
yeah so that's Morgan has shown us
the basics of Soroban but I want to go
into what actually makes it so special
and what makes it so exciting here so
first off it is batteries included for
devs that's our goal here right when
we're when we're designing it everything
we're thinking about designing it that's
our goal and that means we're including
everything from Storage to
authentication and authorization
Frameworks to token minting and
transfers all that's baked in right it's
ready to go so you can focus on your
application and not spend ages trying to
figure out how to like verify an ed
25519 signature right like you shouldn't
have to worry about that
and secondly unlike pretty much any
other smart Contracting platform out
there
because we're launching on the
Stellar Network you get access to all
the existing assets on the vanilla
Stellar Network and I want to address a
comment in chat I think from Matthias
said I should call it classic and not
vanilla and I'm calling it vanilla for a
very specific reason right because the
existing Stellar network is not going
anywhere
right that's still all staying there
it's not being deprecated it's not a
classic thing right it's just a
different flavor of the same thing
it'll still be the fastest cheapest
way to use the network but if you
need a bit more power that's what
Soroban's for
okay but
building on the existing Stellar Network
means that from day one of launch your
smart contracts can hold and use usdc
right and many other assets that are
already on the network
they also have access to Stellar's cash
on and off ramp via our partnership with
MoneyGram which gives which works in
over 200 countries worldwide right so
putting this together we could think of
someone let's say Julia right she
doesn't have a bank account
she can go to her local MoneyGram
location deposit cash into the kiosk she
receives usdc on the Stellar Network in
her wallet
and now with Soroban she can take that
usdc and deposit it into I mean a lot of
things right whatever you're building
but let's say an income generating D5
protocol where she receives a portion of
transaction fees for providing liquidity
right the partnership between Stellar's
anchor Network and MoneyGram allows
users like Julia to move cash straight
from their physical real wallet to a DFI
protocol and vice versa which is
something that I don't think's ever been
seen on any other blockchain network so
far
yeah
and the third Point here I want to talk
about what makes Soroban super special
is the scaling optimizations that we're
doing
so when designing Soroban we've been able
to learn from the state of the art and
hand pick the best solutions from each
one
so we've designed the transaction
execution model the scale across
multiple cores
we've calibrated the fee model to
maximize throughput and minimize cost
while protecting the existing Stellar
Network traffic
so we've designed a lot of optimizations
around the contracts themselves as well
that you don't see on every other chain
so for example if you look at near
not to pick on them I love near but they
do this in the near contracts you need
to do your own serialization the
deserialization of arguments when you
get stuff in and out that means you need
to compile that into your contract and
deploy it as well right so you need to
include that library in Soroban we've
pushed as much as we can out to the host
environment where we can say batteries
included right which lets us massively
reduce the contract size and you don't
need to pay to deploy that code or your
users don't need to pay to run it right
we can take that a little bit further
with built-in contracts so we have an
idea in Soroban of built-in contracts
similar to like pre-compiles you might
know of us on other network
So currently this is just for the
standard asset contract
and it means that it runs Ultra fast
and cheap right
and it lets
contract standardize on the interface
within the ecosystem
and that's the standard asset contract
that we have in Soroban is how Stellar
assets are exposed in Soroban they look
just like any other contract to your
contract so it's really easy to
integrate with existing Stellar assets
the last thing here that's really
cool we're actually working on
solving State bloat with our state
expiration model so on other chains you
store some data on chain and it's there
forever right well forever right in air
quotes we have a rent-based system with
evictions and Restorations to ensure the
Chain's working data set stays as lean
as possible
so
once your rent expires your data gets
evicted and you can pay to have it
restored back on chain if you need it we
can do a deep dive on that another day
it's a bit involved and actually we're
still still designing some of those
elements right now literally right now
on the the call on Discord
so
at this point I think Morgan can
introduce this a bit how stateful
contracts work on sarban and get some of
the basics of those in foreign
boom I'm back
I'm Paul's back too hey Paul
I am muscle back yeah
we're waiting for
my screen share you are waiting for a
screen share of Morgan there you go okay
all right
thank you anyway yeah
thank you Paul so like Paul mentioned
there's quite a bit of innovation going
on
sword I'm and the deeper you go into
it the more you can sort of
understand like you mentioned there's a
design discussion going on right now
we're about to wrap up
every week I think they go on but
anyhow let's discuss the sore month
State of Mind specifically when it comes
to storage and preserving things in
The Ledger
so as I open this up
I want to hide my face and then focus on
the code again if
all right perfect so we we're back to
a brand new project I think we should
rename this to
speak
so we're working on the state on on
the sword State okay
so sooner or later every developer finds
themselves in a situation where their
application is not working as expected I
would say raise your hand if that
happened to you but I can't see you so I
assume everyone's had this problem
and we all know the techniques of how
to solve these things like unit testing
or logging intermittent values using
break points is is a cool way
to inspect stack frames and so forth
but unfortunately
smart contract developers often don't
have a rapid workflow for finding bugs
or faults in the contracts
and you know this leaves them with the
only option of hey I want to test
something out well what do I do I take
the current code for the contract that I
have and I either one of two options I
deploy this to the test net
of your blockchain that you're
working on and I test it against the
wallet
and that's going to be
if you're a very efficient under a
minute or it could take a little
longer
or your your second option if if the
blockchain is is well equipped for
developers let's say you can probably
deploy to a local Docker running
instance
so that's all fine and dandy
but
air is the limit and folks I guess tend
to not test as much as they're used to
because of all the hurdles and so Soroban
takes the challenge hit on by providing
a guest environment right in the SDK so
you'll be able to see in the
documentation if you follow along this
path where you read a contract and
immediately you read a unit test for a
function
and this is using your regular rust
cargo unit tests
with usurubon.app I leverage that
functionality of the of an environment
provide
features to rapidly test
your contracts
so right here
we're gonna we're gonna explore
State because let's let's you know face
it if if we're writing hello world
probably bugs won't affect anything too
much if we're dealing with State then
bugs all of a sudden become an issue all
right so let's let's begin how do we
store something on The Ledger
we're gonna head and start with the same
no STD so we're not going to import the
standard Library
we're going to use the
critical elements like contract
implementation and environment Within
you know and let's grab a simple as well
from the SDK and we're going to declare
another contract
on track okay and then we're going to
implement this contract with a couple of
functions
let's clear this
upper way contract implementation all
right so what what do we want to test to
sort of showcase this well first let's
compile compile often right
never too often to compile
we're going to have some some data in
the storage and on The Ledger and we're
going to save and retrieve that data so
we're going to have a couple of
functions so let's declare save as the
one that will put data Into The Ledger
and we're gonna
explore a number
it's gonna be u32 now save is going
to return the same number just
for the sake of it I guess and we're
gonna load
a number
environment
and it's going to return that number
so it's essentially save and load two
functions for this contract let's
compile this again make sure nothing
breaks
oh okay well I guess I compiled it a
little too early let's return some
value here
oops
okay
so we have
we have something of an issue
I remove this let's make sure this
compiles again
let me back out of this
oh
we don't need to back out of this we're
just not returning a value before
should have trusted the rest compiler
errors all right so we call save it
takes in a number
and by the way this is one of those nice
abstractions that you get with
an environment like usurubund.app
let's say a function takes in some
arguments right in this case it takes in
a number argument that's a u32 well we
have a nice modal that we can input our
number
to confirm and that's going to call
our function
as far as integrating into soribine
there's another nice feature that's
part of the I guess Soroban contract
specification so when you compile the
contract there's
some amount of that byte code that's
compiled allocated for specifications so
let's say save something rather save a
number to The Ledger
okay let's compile this again
we can see that the modal now
incorporates our comment for that
function to describe what exactly this
number does or what exactly this
function does so we're going to click
confirm
and let's add a another
specification here or the docs for this
function load a number from the layer
pile this again
and oh it doesn't take any arguments
it's not going to display that that
modal that's fine all right let's return
the number
as our first exercise
it's gonna be u32
and
we got 42 in the console here and right
so now the magic part how do we take the
number that we provided in our
modal here and put it into storage
wow
we need a certain key something to
store it under and for that we're gonna
declare a constant
and it's going to be a symbol value
that's why I'm imported symbol and it's
going to be
I'm not original with names under these
circumstances I'm just going to use
storage
and
over here we're going to pick the same
environment that we've used before for
logging and we're going to reference
storage okay
compile this
oh
about the year I was expecting so
storage is a method not a field as we
can see inside of this error message
we can go ahead and inspect what exactly
storage is in the documentation and
let's see exactly how to use it so we
can see that there is a set function
under storage it takes a key and a value
okay so with this new knowledge here
since this is a method not a field
we're going to call This And since we
observe that it has a public function
set we're going to call that set
function to store what we're storing
so we're going to provide storage as the
key right
and we're going to provide number
Something That We're storing or the
value
of this so save 42. confirm all right
how do we know that we did store this
correctly well that's why we have this
load function here
and
how do we retrieve something right we
used set to store it how do we retrieve
it
well we can go back to the documentation
real quick and see that there is a get
function
associated with storage and it returns
an option that's a result that
potentially has that value
so there's
you'll see that there's some
unwrapping that needs to happen
oh so we go ahead and reference that
same storage call that same storage and
call the get
method and we want to get the value
under storage the the key so what do we
get we get
an error
because we're trying to return a u32 so
let's return to u32. now we get another
area that says
we want to have a u32 but we get an
option so whenever we're getting a value
from Storage on sorobond any kind of in
a store buying contract we don't know
whether the value is there and we don't
know whether that value is the value
that we're going to return in this case
a u32 or it could be a symbol we just
don't know so we can go ahead and
unwrap this
option and see if that works
well then there's the question of
returning a result so at this point we
unwrap the option we're sure that
there's a value there but we're not sure
whether that value is a u32 value
so we can do clever unwrapping here but
I'm just going to do a silly unwrapping
so it panics if it's not a u32 and let's
compile this again
so let's go ahead and Save
and load okay so we just put a number
onto The Ledger under a specific key and
we retrieved that number from The Ledger
we had an experiment with 420 and load
the value do something else it works
okay so there's a complication that I
want to implement here
and it's a little bit different from
what we did during Paris blockchain week
this is something that tolmer told me
to do and so I'm just going to see if
this works if it doesn't well hey this
is a demo these things break
so here's the here's the gist I want to
store a number for a specific account so
I want to store numbers under accounts I
just don't want to store a single number
I want to store it as many numbers as I
have accounts
so we're going to modify this save
function here a little bit
we're going to take in a user
argument or parameter that's called
user let's type address so address
refers to any valid blocking address on
the Stellar blockchain
and then we're going to take in a number
we're going to return the same value
and let's just see what this does so if
if I call Save
I'm greeted with this second field here
so use oribon you know this modal
expands to however many arguments that
your function takes and there's another
cool abstraction here when dealing with
accounts on the blockchain it can be
like really tricky for someone just get
getting started right how do I know how
to generate one do I need the private or
the secret key here
that's a lot for someone that's you
know into JavaScript or something so for
that reason you saw a line.app
completely abstracts away
interactions with accounts by using just
regular names so how many users does the
system have it has three users Alex Bart
and Cali you can select either one and
that in the background abstracts it away
into a specific address within the back
within the current environment which
is running in your browser
all right so we select Alex one so
nothing happened really we just you know
have a a parameter that we're calling
this function with but we're not using
it yet so let's try and use this okay so
under storage
instead of putting everything into the
same
key under the same key let's try and
use user okay
so let's compile this thing get compiled
and let's call Alex and let's do pen
okay
so that sort of kind of worked but how
do we sort of debug this right
we can
probably do a log here
although
maybe we should just use the load
function okay I'll just do a little
function here so when loading previously
we only had one key and we have any
number of keys that
correspond to each user so instead of
using storage we're going to use user
okay so here's
here's an experiment so let's we saved
I think we saved
let's save 10 under Alex again so let's
load Alex
oh we got a 10. so that worked let's try
Bart
it trapped okay so the Trap means that
the value doesn't exist but we
explicitly tell this thing to unwrap
unwrap unwrap
not caring about the underlying value
so we can go ahead and sort of
test this out so here's this log macro
that we used before
and
call this with
an arrow just to have some string value
in there
and let's see what that returns
we probably need to do some matching
here
foreign
type I think I'm going a little over the
the description here but the point being
is that we can store values under
whatever key that we want and the key
can be anything in this case I just
displayed that it can be a specific
address so we'll just go over each user
Alex is going to have 11 Bart is going
to have 22 and Cali is going to have
33.
and let's go ahead and check each one so
Alex 11. okay Cali 33 and Bart is 22. so
this is much more elegant than what we
had during Pierce blockchain week
were you storing values under
specific usernames thank you Tomer for
this suggestion
and sort of the nice deviation
from the from the standard here
all right so that concludes my second
demo for the Soroban state of mind if
anyone wants to again experiment with
this please tweet me on Twitter at
soribandev and I'll make sure you have
access
thank you so much Morgan Tyler yeah let
me bring Tyler onto stream howdy Tyler
how are you hello
all right let's bring up your screen
here and nice tell us all about the 100
million dollars two opportunities sounds
very interesting so I'll let you take it
off yeah don't let me talk about much
they do let me talk about the money
so we've got
basically two main opportunities here
for engaging with Soroban right now so
we're we're in this phase between
being on the future net moving to
test net eventually be on mainnet
later on this year
but while we're in this phase of
developing Soroban and really trying to
understand how to build it in this
malleable stage of solving difficult
problems and trying to build the bless
the best blockchain smart contract
value transfer protocol in the world
there's some unique opportunities here
and I'm going to talk about two
inside of this 100 million dollar
Adoption Fund that the sdfs put out
one is the one that I'm responsible
for and that's fast cheap and out of
control
it's kind of a it's primarily an
educational content generation engine
where you can learn rust smart
contract development
how those two things come together
under under the sorobond umbrella
right now it's a it's a game that
really takes you through
Soroban contract development with the
with the objective of trying to build
fast contracts cheap contracts and out
of control contracts
over the next few months this is
we're dropping a little bit of alpha
today we're going to be migrating
a lot more attention to fast cheap
and out of control for sorobond
development
Stellar Quest is going to become
really for a vanilla
or if you're on team classic classic
seller
that's where that education is going
to be and then for Soroban related
material it'll it'll all be living on
Fast cheap and out of control so make
sure to keep an eye out on that and the
second one would be the the Stellar
Community Fund
right so we got our fast Jeep and out of
control that would be your your site
for that
fca00c or ooc I have all the domains
for this and then the second one for
for the folks that are developing
protocols or startups wanting to migrate
existing
D5 protocols Etc over to the sarban
ecosystem the seller Community Fund
is the place for you We've really
been optimizing Anka and the team have
been optimizing the Community Fund for
both the the vanilla classic Stellar
applications as well as Soroban
applications so there's a really nice
clean
process for for getting onto the the
seller Community Fund getting funding
for different protocols or experiments
that you might have for that so those
would be the the two big pieces that I'd
call out again the fast Jeep and out of
control for those who are either new to
rust smart contract development even is
the Soroban ecosystem evolves and grows a
big gap that I have I have felt as I've
explored the competitive landscape is
not just teaching people how to write
rust or teaching people how wasm works
or educating people on D5 protocols or
amms but really trying to identify where
our vulnerabilities coming from how do
we write good smart contracts how do we
write safe smart contracts where do
standards come from with someone like
where open Zeppelin might have come from
where OpenZeppelin might have come from
in the in the ethereum ecosystem trying
to ensure that the contracts that we're
building are are good so building out
games and community events for
tackling specific difficult problems so
they're able to arrive a good
documentation and standards for writing
good smart contracts developing a smart
contract is very different than
developing just a standard application
and some of those differences I don't
think we've focused enough on on solving
or teaching for especially what the
fcaoc is is aiming to to solve for and
then the Community Fund for funding
folks that are actually doing
application startup
entrepreneurial type type work
so that's those make sure to check
those out and I will hand it back to
Morgan I believe
all right
sweet
I see here Morgan you got we should
definitely do weekly informal developer
workshops I think that would be awesome
and I think Matthias is slowly working
on something that he's holding secret
until he does like a heart build the
beans Matthias I know
do you want me to share a screen here
Morgan
I think we're good I don't have
a slide to go with this it's just
gonna be my saurabhan story I guess and
a little background as well
so no slides needed and
yeah by the way very nice shout out
in in the Chinese or free access to
viewers if you tweet at me on Twitter
all right so my story about story so
my developer story
going back real far started as
a kid with a Fascination with
computers and
I remember I was 14 when I wrote
my first line of code
and for me that was you know that
experience informed what I was going to
do from that point onward and I've made
a career out of it in almost 20 years of
frustration
followed with the joy of seeing
something that you build come to life
so that's I guess any developers Journey
there
and the reason I'm sharing the the
frustration with the joy part is because
I feel this industry and I'm talking
specifically about the blockchain
industry has not focused enough on
the joy of building
while providing ample frustration and
you can probably see that in your own
experience there's a lot
so over the last two years I've tried
playing around with a few smart contract
platforms
spending considerable amount of time
with two of them and in the end I
felt a little bit like Dorothy from The
Wizard of Oz in a conversation with
Scarecrow and Tin Man trying to find out
why one had no brain and the other one
had no heart
and in my frustration I continued
looking
for a platform that had both a heart and
a brain
and just last November I found Soroban
the first sore bonathon was taking place
and anuhe was hosting that and it was a
beautiful experience on GitHub you log
in and you know everybody's
sort of submitting their own ideas
and and thoughts and experiencing the
joy of of development technology and
right yeah so I I took part in that
right yeah so I took part in that
I've jumped right on it
and I found out about Soroban in the
process I found out about xdr which is
the data format for storing things on
Stellar
that Soroban uses and then I started
getting into rust and
it's a long journey and doing so
without prior experience mind you
and then lastly was webassembly the
one of the key building blocks of of
Soroban
and my first projects were very simple
mostly to do with optimizations of the
development workflow
one workflow or another and I made
some submissions along those lines I
think it was five in total yeah there
were a lot of them actually you were one
of our Superstar submitters to
silverwater thought if I recall yeah
and and it was a blast and and the
community on Discord was great in the
community on GitHub was great people
were commenting and so forth
so that was a really soft and nice
nice introduction to to sort of buying
and my final project
as part of sorbineathon I think I
submitted it last day
was a browser tool for interacting
with the Soroban RPC server something
that a lot of folks do when interacting
with any kind of blockchain
you don't go directly to a node
you're running you go to an RPC server
for y'all remote procedure call
server I remember the https from
Bloomberg
gotta spell it out so the RPC server
thing I wanted to build a great
developer experience for anyone building
and testing their contracts because
deploying the contract
invoking the contract is often tricky if
you want to do it with arguments and
stuff and especially if you're sort of
coming in from a command line
and in doing that I spent countless
hours working on various parts of the
stack from the wasm executable to the
host environment and then it hit me I
realized something
I had everything I needed to build a
self-contained browser environment for
executing and testing sort of on
contracts and I just sort of blew my
mind like I had I had everything I
needed to build the perfect
perfect playground experience and
so seeing how coupling webassembly the
virtual machine together with sorbent
host environment specification enabled
that browser-based developer tool
that I had in mind and many others that
you can sort of picture was my aha
moment and
I just started working in
seeing how I could build tools with you
know within the browser that required no
setup no Docker I'm no fan of like all
these massive setups that take 10
minutes if you're efficient
no nothing just sort of log into a
website and start experiencing sorbine
like that and
I you know immediately afterwards I
started building it and
I I started debugging and engaging the
the community further and
this was I think in February when
some of the programs that Tyler
mentioned SCF
I applied with use sorobond.app
because at that point it was brewing for
like two months
and
I got in and with with the help of
the Community Fund
I was able to continue building this
sort of I I call it the the developer
sort of I call it the the developer
playground of my dreams because it's
everything I ever wanted from a smart
contract playground
and
all of this happened like from scratch
to launching a a community-funded
project in less than four months yeah
like October not even I think it was
late November
yeah and then there was a gap in
December and sort of you know it's like
light speed so my experience so far
has been Stellar
and I really really appreciate the
community for
for allowing me to to go through what
I went through
so thumbs up and yeah that's my
Soroban story that was so wholesome and
well put Morgan thank you for sharing
that seriously
I think there's a question here about
youth sorbom where can we make token
contracts on new Soroban
very soon
I will open it up sorry go ahead yeah
I'll I'll open it up next week
There's a massive update and I'm working
on ever since getting back from from
Paris and stay tuned I'll I'll keep
you guys updated yeah I mean Morgan's
all into this y'all just clarify I
mean here's an awesome office now and
he's like set up like an entire space
and whatnot it's a whole thing you saw
about is like the next big thing here in
the store of on ecosystems you hear you
heard it here first
I see there's
Matthias is saying that I'll blow
your mind 2x Morgan thank you sore bomb
plus test Runner plus Cooperative coding
in that Dev environment AKA vs code live
share there's a lot there's a lot of
Minds ready to be blown I think in in
the next few months there's so much
Innovation happening in this space
absolutely I'm so excited thank you
for everything that you do for this
Arbonne ecosystem Morgan so yeah I'm
gonna bring Paul back up on here
everyone
hey everybody
right I'm just gonna wrap up here
quick
yeah I hope you'll All Join the
community and we can blow mines
together
smart contracts bring a ton of new
Incredible use cases and power and
Innovation to Stellar all right for me
personally you know it's a hugely
exciting new piece of tech right like
what can I say like I'm an engineer
you know I can say that storybond will
allow us to bridge the disconnect
between developers and people on the
fringes of financial inclusion right or
that there's a lot of chances to learn
Tinker build earn rewards with the
Adoption Fund programs
like Morgan's doing
but what I will say is that I hope
the experimentation we're all doing will
lead to building real businesses real
projects and real world use cases on
sorbonne to help further Financial
inclusion
yeah if that gets you going the same way
it does me then my job's done cool I can
go eat dinner
but like seriously you know if you're
excited about this right you can start
experimenting with Soroban right now
right
it's live running on our experimental
test net called futurenet
and I want to encourage you all to
consider how and where you might fit
into what's coming later this year when
Soroban launches for real onto Stellar's
net onto Stellar's mainnet
and if I were you yeah start coding
right check out you serve on tell your
programmer friends to poke around see if
it's the right time to take a look at
Stellar there's a QR code on the screen
that'll take you to soarbon.Stellar.org
that is the place to go to learn more
there's links to everything you need
there docs the Discord join the
Discord keep up with developments all
the devs that are building Soroban every
day are on there answering your
questions yeah thank you so much for
your time I can't wait to see what
you'll build
back to you new here thank you so much
Paul
I do want to re-emphasize here the
fact that we are building Soroban out
there in the streets as I like to think
and not in like some laboratory so
everything is out there join the
developer discords be active as Paul had
said it best everyone on the stream that
is watching or will ever come across is
you're already part of the Stellar
ecosystem and Community here so come on
over start building tinkering
and let's make this a vibrant and
thriving community of developers so yeah
thank you all for joining us on the
stream stay tuned and we'll see you
in the Discord take care bye everyone